30 April--------

RDS--Amazon service for Relational databases activities.

its a fully managed service.

its for Sql -RDBMS -

we can create RDBMS server in AWS and then acccess this from Ec2 machine.


RDBMS server(data) ---------------------- RDBMS client-- work-- we - connection



what RDBMS AWS supports--

PostGresql
Oracle
mysql
MS sql server

what RDS does for us--

server creation 

hardware requirement- storage

back ups of data

maintenanace

monitoring

scaling 


demo -- 

RDS service -- it will give me server(instance)--- database 

database server

       database 1
         tables
         views
         stored procedures

       database 2

         tables
         views
         stored procedures


et-yourname-SG-30April
      
 
1st May 2026--

DynamoDB in AWS--

DynamoDB is fully managed service of aws .

to handle no-sql database.

this is different than RDBMS(fixed schema)

in Dynamodb-- no fixed schema(means any number of columns we can take.)


it stores data in key-value pair format .

here row is known as item

no-sql databases are - mongodb, cosmosdb, dynamodb.

each item has the primary key here known as partition key.

features--

1- auto-scalable

2- key-value pair data format is json.

3- fully managed

4- built in security- encryption+ IAM access control.

DynamoDB is no-sql service in aws

cosmosDB is no-sql service in azure

MongoDB is open source no-sql database.

101 
    watch -- good   9:42

101 

   mobile-- good    9:43


name DOB Mobile Fathersname

veena  11-02

veena  12-03

veena  12-03


4th May-- SNS and SQS

SNS- simple notification service

1- its a fully managed service of AWS.

2- this service is for sending notification.

3- it follows concept of publisher and subscriber.

4- core idea--

            publisher sends the message to topic.

            subscriber takes the message from topic.



5- Subscriber can be multiple.

6- Topic is like a communication channel between publisher and subscribers.

pulishers can be--

  EC2 machines
  Lembda functions
  applictaions

Subscribers can be --

  Email
  SMS
  Http /Https endpoints
 AWS SQS


How it works--work flow of SNS

       create topic
       Add subscribers(Email, SMS)
       Publish message
       SNS delivers to subscribers
     
         
type of messaging---

 standard- by default

 FIFO -- First in first out.


AWS-SQS-- simple queue service.

1- fully managed service by AWS

2- here communication happens Asynchroneous

core idea --

SQS is based on message queue--

 producer sends the messages to queue.

 consumer reads and process them later.


protocol in chat systems  for messaging queue is MSMQ - 


 Queue-  A temporary storage of messages.

 Messages wait here till processed.

 Prodcuer (sender ) can be --


 web apps-
 Aws lembda
 Ec2 instances


Consumer (receiver) can be

service who process the messages. 

ex- back ground workers
    microservices.


How it works -- work flow-

Producer sends the message to SQS.

Message stores in queue.

consumer Polls the queue

consumer process the message and delete it.


Type of SQS queues---

1- standard
2-FIFO


important terms---

Visibility timeout- 

  when consumer pick the message to process - message will be temporary invisible to others.

Dead letter queue-(DLQ)

stores messages fails multiple processing multiple times.

Message retention---

 message can retain in queue (1 minute to 14 days.)


demo 1- SNS--- login aws

step 1- create topic

step 2- Access policy of this topic

step 3- select publisher an subscriber(email)


step 4- create subscription as email.

step 5- publish message


demo 2-SQS

step 1- create SQS

step 2- in own topic create subscription as SQS -- select protocol as SQS and end point(your own SQS)

step 3- publish message by SNS

step 4- go to own SQS - send and receive -- receiver - POll messages .

5th May- Lembda functions in AWS

1-Lembda function is a piece of code which runs on cloud without managing servers.

2-Its a serverless computing service of AWS.

3-AWS manage all servers.

4- so without managing servers , technology etc. we can just write the code and run it this is known as Lembda function.


5- Lembda function is triggered(executes) on any particular event.

       ex- 

         1- We want to execute Lembda function when file uploaded in S3 bucket.

         2- Any changes in DynamoDB.

         3- Any request hits API gateway.

         
         
6- AWS automatically runs your Lembda function on particular event occurs.

7- No servers to manage

8- Auto scaling.

9- pay as you use.


Demo -- when We upload files to S3 bucket then Lembda function should run.

step 1- Login AWS in mobile or News app --> create Lembda function


           print("File uploaded to S3 bucket")

       
step 2-- Create bucket.


step 3- Give permission to Lembda for full access of bucket.

step 4- Go to Lembda --> select trigger as S3 bucket.

step 5- code deploy of Lembda.

07 May -- AWS devops --

what is devops -- Dev(developement team)+ops(operation team/production support / deployment team)

before devops -- no any co-oridation b/w dev teams and ops team.

issue-for code integrations and code deployments(code is going to release- live ) 

Agile - flexibility and transperancy

scrum -- break your big project into smaller parts for development

those smaller parts are known as sprints -- collection of user stories (work items)


design the page

code for the page

write stored procedure

create tables


sprint timelines are 3-4 weeks --

sprint planning meeting--

client side SME (subject matter expert) , PO(Product owner) , SM(Scrum master)
PM, PL, Developers, Testers etc. 

sprint 1 --2 devlopers, 1 tester, 2 ops team member

6 stories -

3 story each developer will do--

3 story assign to ops team person 

1 dev----- 1 ops team member


devops --

client side SME (subject matter expert) , PO(Product owner) , SM(Scrum master)
PM, PL, Developers, Testers+ ops team


devops means--

CI - Continuous integration - integrating your code multiple times in a day.

                      code is integrating to code repository

CD - Continuous deployement -  code is going for release - means adding to cloud -AWS/Azure


Automation ----

by creating build pipeline and release pipeline

build pipeline --- code+ automated test cases- 


release pipeline - deployment to cloud


work flow of devops --


local system - do the code /changes -- GIT commands --- push to Github, codeCommit(AWS code repository)- build pipeline (it will compile whole code along with test cases)---


Release pipeline -- deployment -- - user can see new changes in website.


AWS devops -- 

repository - CodeCommit

Build pipeline-- CodeBuild

Release pipeline-- CodeDeploy

We combined and automate codeBuild and CodeDeploy by CodePipeline

Elastic beanstalk








